What is the next block?
The next topic, the next block that we will consider is information security.
Information security, I have already said, is a state of security of information resources of a company
achieved by means of a set of measures, I draw your attention to the set of measures, aimed at the protection of information.
If we are writing down information resources, here is the information,
it is divided into two large groups, these are open information resources,
that is, information resources that have no access restrictions.
As a rule, it is regulated by the law on the means of mass information,
and everything that concerns open information resources is not subject to information security.
And this is an information resource with limited access.
Let's call it that way, information with limited access.
Information with limited access is divided into two large groups,
this is state secret, this is confidential information.
Confidential information.
This is at the level of state information resources.
State secret is clear, there is a law on state secrets,
certain licenses are required, certain rules must be observed,
this is not a subject of our classes, our seminars.
Confidential information.
What is confidential information?
There is a presidential decree, 188, on the approval of the list of confidential information,
where it is written what confidential information is.
What is confidential information?
The first is personal data.
This is information about the facts, events and circumstances in a citizen's private life,
which allows you to identify his personality.
Just six months ago, the law on personal data was introduced,
where the rules of the game are prescribed on the market of personal data.
Personal data is protected,
and those organizations that face personal data must protect personal data.
In principle, any employer faces personal data,
so any employer must take measures to protect personal data of its employees.
There are articles in the Labor Code on personal data,
or rather on the protection of personal data of the employer.
Unfortunately, we must note that personal data is not well protected,
so a large number of personal data in semi-legal form is presented on the market
as part of some kind of personal data.
Nevertheless, this is an objective reality,
and I think that in time, order will be established here.
What is it?
This is a commercial secret.
I will talk about the commercial secret in more detail later.
There is a commercial secret law,
that is, there are rules of the game regarding how the commercial secret should be kept.
It should be borne in mind that any commercial structure can have a commercial secret.
This is legal information that represents a commercial value,
and this information can be in the company.
The next one is the so-called service secret.
This is a service secret.
There is a concept of a service secret,
but unfortunately, there is no law on the service secret at the legislative level,
so you can only guess what a service secret is.
In fact, this is information of state bodies,
which are subject to the closure of state bodies,
but do not fall under the regime of the state secret.
In a simplified version, this is the so-called DSP bar for service use.
As a rule, the service secret is related to the work of state bodies.
What else falls under confidential information?
Under confidential information, there are so-called professional secrets.
Professional secret.
Professional secret is where there is a certain profession.
At the legislative level, there are about 15 types of secrets related to certain professions.
The most common are the notary secret, the lawyer's secret, the medical secret, and so on.
This is also a section of confidential information.
This is a confidential matter of the shipyard.
This is confidential information about the essence of the invention,
the use of the model or industrial sample.
This is so-called confidential information.
I will stop at the commercial secret.
This is a direction of activity.
Many organizations are forming a commercial secret regime.
This activity arose after the adoption of the commercial secret law.
There are already certain developments that can be shared.
I will write it in abbreviated form.
The commercial secret.
The commercial secret appeared not yesterday and not 10 years ago.
At the level of the Russian state, before the revolution, there was a concept of a production secret.
In fact, this is a commercial secret.
After the revolution of 1917, there was a concept of a commercial secret.
Commercial activity was developed during the NEP.
After the NEP, when commercial activity ceased to exist, the concept of a commercial secret was abolished.
In 1990, when a new regulatory base was created,
when the law on the basis of business activity in the USSR was adopted,
the concept of a commercial secret was born.
The Civil Code has an entire article on the commercial secret.
This article regulates the existence of a commercial secret,
the possibility of protecting the commercial secret in all legal ways,
and the responsibility for the disclosure of the commercial secret.
These are the three fundamental points that are in the Civil Code on the commercial secret.
At the level of the law, this problem also arose in the 1990s.
Somewhere in 1998, the commercial secret bill existed.
It was not fully implemented.
The commercial secret law was implemented only in 2004,
when it was signed by the President.
What does it say?
What do I want to draw your attention to when we talk about the commercial secret law?
There are some fundamental points that you should know if you are going to create a commercial secret regime.
The information that constitutes a commercial secret must be recorded on material media.
What is it about?
If it is not recorded on material media, you cannot create a commercial secret regime.
Material media can be either paper media or electronic media.
Electronic media must be recorded on material media.
It can be floppy disks, hard drives, hard drives, anything.
The second point is the legal way to obtain a commercial secret.
It has always been believed that a commercial secret can be stolen,
that it can be obtained in some illegal way.
A commercial secret is a commodity that can be bought or sold.
It can be obtained as a result of systematic investigations.
The third point is what cannot be a commercial secret.
It cannot be a commercial secret.
Countries in the world have developed in two different ways.
Some countries have decided what can be a commercial secret.
The law states that information about this or that can be a commercial secret.
Other countries, including Russia, have taken a different path.
We have decided on the level of the law, before that there was a government resolution,
and we have decided to keep our commercial secrets as an exception.
It is considered a more democratic method.
However, when this problem first arose in the early 1990s,
it was not clear what a commercial secret should be.
What cannot be a commercial secret?
The first thing that cannot be a commercial secret is identification data.
Identification data.
All the information about identification data can be a set of documents,
documents confirming the registration of legal entities and individual entrepreneurs
in accordance with the Regulations of the State, documents giving the right to engage in entrepreneurial activity,
that is, licenses, a list of individuals who have the right to act without confidence, and so on.
The next point is what cannot be a commercial secret.
As far as I understand, identification data never tries to be a commercial secret,
on the contrary, all licenses and patents are put in a frame somewhere in plain sight.
Everything that concerns workers and working conditions.
Information about workers and working conditions in commercial and non-commercial organizations cannot be a commercial secret.
What is it about? The number of workers, the availability of free jobs,
the system of labor payment, labor conditions, labor security,
the employment of employers on the basis of salary payment, social payments,
the indicators of production trauma, and so on.
All this information cannot be a commercial secret.
Here, the question usually arises about the labor payment system.
That is, it is possible or impossible to make absolute figures, that is, a salary is a commercial secret.
There are different approaches.
In principle, the labor payment system can be quite simple,
advance payment, payment and bonus.
This cannot be a commercial secret.
In principle, I think that you can make your commercial secrets in absolute quantities.
The issue is quite controversial, even at the level of judicial decisions.
Information about non-commercial organizations cannot be a commercial secret.
The size of income and expenditure structures, the size of the total property, the use of unpaid labor, and so on.
The point is that a commercial secret is not clearly tied to a commercial organization.
A commercial secret can be in a state enterprise.
Here, at the level of the law, it is not limited to the fact that a commercial secret is necessarily a commercial enterprise.
Just terminology.
Information about state enterprises, state enterprises, state enterprises, unitary enterprises and state institutions,
the composition of property, the use of funds of appropriate budgets, conditions of competitions, auctions, and so on.
Here is an interesting point.
Everything related to information is related to the implementation of security requirements.
The implementation of security requirements.
What is this about?
This is about the security of citizens.
According to the logic of the law, corporate security is not taken into account.
Security of all citizens is taken into account.
Corporate security, security of the organization, security of the legal entity, is usually a commercial secret.
This is some kind of classified information.
We are talking about the security of citizens.
Pollution of the environment, state of fire safety, sanitary, epidemiological and radiation situation.
Roughly speaking, if there is a factory and it dumps some not very useful substances into the river,
then the information that it does this cannot be a commercial secret.
If some products are produced, that there are some not very useful products or ingredients for a person,
information about this cannot be a commercial secret.
Everything related to corporate security is usually a commercial secret.
Information about violations of the law cannot be a commercial secret.
Information about the obligation to disclose them or the inability to restrict them is established by various federal laws.
Everything else can be a commercial secret.
Generally, there are some methods of determining a commercial secret.
At the level of our law on commercial secrets, ideology is all that is allowed and all that is not prohibited.
Therefore, the method exists, such a concept as a total method.
Although in practice, as far as I know, it is practically not applied, but in general, it exists.
How does the situation work?
All the information resources of the company are taken,
from there information resources that cannot be a commercial secret are taken out,
everything related to open information is removed,
because it makes no sense to close information that can be obtained in the open.
The state secret is removed, some other information is removed, and everything else is done in a commercial secret.
This is a total method, all the information that can be disclosed.
As a rule, this is a very expensive event, and rarely any companies can afford to close their information resources.
Therefore, other methods are usually used,
or there is such a concept as the plagiarism method.
What does the plagiarism mean?
It assumes that there is such a concept as a plagiarism, that is, a methodology, I would say.
A company is taken, which is approximately similar to yours in terms of volume,
in terms of the number of people, in terms of the produced product or provided services.
If there is a commercial secret mode, then it is looked at and determined what is done in that company.
And do the same thing in your company, because the companies work on the same market.
It is widely used.
There is a method called the expert method.
Expert, as a rule, is the attraction of experts, that is, the attraction of specialists from the outside.
And there is a method called the analytical method.
Analytical.
That is, a certain analysis of the company's activities is carried out from the point of view of what is necessary to do in a commercial secret.
Basically, the analytical method is based on what?
It is based on what interests the competitor.
That is, they try to put themselves in the shoes of competitors and try to understand what can interest the competitor.
And the second direction of the analytical method is what will cause damage.
That is, we try to understand what information can damage the disclosure.
Based on this, they try to determine what information should be included in the commercial secret.
From these methods, the first, second and fourth, this company can do it on its own.
The third method, that is, the attraction of experts, is that you find an organization, pay them money, and based on these three methods, they try to determine everything.
This is based on methods.
Now the next point.
The law, if we analyze it this way, is very organizational.
That is, you will not find any innovations there, you will not find any rigidly regulating things applicable to your company.
It is very organizational.
That is, it is general and very organizational.
That is, rights, duties, what can be done, what cannot be done.
Naturally, each company creates its own commercial secret regime and creates it for itself.
Here, by the way, is a very subtle point that I would like to draw your attention to.
At least, many companies face this.
If you have to pass your commercial secret to some other organization, within the framework of something, within the framework of consulting, within the framework of some kind of contractual cooperation,
keep in mind that the commercial secret regime in another organization can be completely different.
Unlike, say, the state secret regime, which is unified at all enterprises, where there are state secrets, and throughout Russia.
The commercial secret regime is unique, it is individual, it is created directly in each company, and is approved by the management of the company.
In your company, the commercial secret regime can be very strong and very serious.
You will pass it on to some other company, there may be a completely different regime, and everything may be completely different, much worse.
Therefore, keep this in mind.
And, in principle, I would not recommend passing commercial secrets anywhere.
That is, you can talk about the serious preservation of commercial secrets only when these commercial secrets are with you.
As soon as you pass your commercial secrets somewhere, you can very conditionally say that these commercial secrets will be protected or preserved.
Another point I would like to emphasize is the relationship between enterprises and various state bodies within the framework of the commercial secret regime.
It is clear that there are controlling law enforcement agencies that can come to the company and carry out some actions.
This can be within the framework of inspection activities, it can be within the framework of investigative activities, it can be within the framework of operational activities.
It is pointless and impossible to protect yourself from this with the help of commercial secrets,
simply because, according to our legislation, you must provide information on the motivated requirements of these state bodies, including the component of the commercial secret.
This will not limit or limit various inspections.
Another thing is that if you provide your commercial secrets to state bodies, they take on the obligation to preserve your commercial secrets.
The next point I would like to draw your attention to is the so-called commercial secret regime.
The regime of the CT.
It is impossible to say that we have a commercial secret or not.
You can say that there is a commercial secret regime only when you conduct a number of events that will allow you to say that you have a commercial secret regime.
And, of course, all the consequences resulting from this.
I have already said, I emphasize again, that the commercial secret regime is an individual event.
The commercial secret regime is individual for each company and it can be different in different companies.
The commercial secret regime is determined by the company's manager.
That is, he approves certain documents that say what the commercial secret regime is and how it will be implemented.
There is no maximum list of events on the commercial secret regime.
There is a minimum number of events that you have to do to say that you have a commercial secret regime.
This minimum is listed in the law of the commercial secret regime.
I will now talk about them in more detail.
There is no maximum, of course.
According to the Civil Code and the law of the commercial secret regime,
a company can implement any legal methods and methods of protecting its commercial secrets.
I emphasize, legal methods, but any.
What is the minimum on the commercial secret regime?
What is the minimum that must be done?
The first is to determine the information component of the commercial secret.
That is, you must determine what your commercial secret is.
There are certain subtleties and difficulties.
How does it usually happen?
Usually, the security service is tasked with creating a list of information components of the commercial secret.
The security service usually sends out letters to the structural units asking for suggestions
on including some information components in the section of the commercial secret.
The unit is based on the fact that the more information is hidden, the better.
The security service composes and analyzes all this,
and throws out at least half of it,
because it makes no sense to hide information resources that can be openly available.
Therefore, they usually try to protect the most serious and potentially significant information.
If this succeeds, then they will expand this list of information.
Therefore, as a recommendation, if you are going to do the commercial secret regime,
try to close the smallest part of your information resources.
This may not be very expensive and easy to organize.
If you succeed, then try to expand this list.
No one forbids you to periodically revise it, expand it, narrow it down.
It's up to you.
What will you face here?
The list of information components of the commercial secret is usually information about.
This is some information about what information is subject to closure.
Usually, this is 1, 2, maximum 3 pages.
The difficulty is to determine what is under these information.
You can close the company's plan documents.
The plan document of the company is the commercial secret.
This is information that is subject to closure.
Then there should be a person, a person in office,
who would determine what documents are distributed to these plan documents of the company.
In the list, it can be one item, but in reality, it can be hundreds, thousands of documents.
Every day there will be a couple of dozen more documents.
It is much more difficult to determine which documents are related to the company's plan documents.
It is much more difficult.
Determining the information component of the commercial secret and, of course, its approval of this list.
It is usually approved either by order, the classic form, that is, the order of the company's manager.
Such information about this, about that, is related to the commercial secret.
This is a classic option.
Sometimes this option is used, it is just an approval signature.
That is, I approve, there is a general director, where the list of information components of the commercial secret will also be listed.
This is the first thing to do to determine the commercial secret regime.
The second thing that is usually done.
In the law, this is a huge set of measures.
This is a restriction of access to information.
Restriction of access to information.
This is a whole set of measures, including personnel, organizational, regime, technical, and other things,
concerning the restriction of access to information.
That is, you have determined that some information is a commercial secret, and then you must restrict access to this information.
If this is a small number of documents or a small number of information resources, this can be done.
As soon as these information resources take up half of the company's information resources,
this is very difficult, very expensive, and usually it is simply not feasible.
Therefore, in any case, if you have a leak of information,
you will have to prove that you have restricted access to this information.
Here is a criminal, he committed a crime and violated your access restriction system.
That is, if you determine that the company's plan documents are a commercial secret,
and these papers are printed out, lying around,
then you don't have to talk about the commercial secret regime, because no one will do any hacking.
That is, the information will be lost in any case.
This is the second restriction of access to information.
The third restriction of access to information is the solution of personnel problems.
What is it usually?
This is the definition of the people you will trust the information.
The definition of the circle of persons.
That is, the definition of those people you will trust your commercial secrets.
There can be not many of them,
you usually define certain people, personally,
for example, Ivanov, Petrov, Sidorov, have access to commercial secrets.
Moreover, it is not necessary to allow a person to access all your commercial information.
We are talking about permission to commercial secrets only within the framework of fulfilling your duties.
If this is a financial person, then everything that concerns finances.
If this is a technologist, then everything that concerns technology.
But you have to define the circle of persons.
And this circle of persons must be officially approved.
Basically, it is determined through an order that Ivanov, Petrov, Sidorov are allowed to access official or commercial information.
These employees must take obligations.
Take obligations.
Take obligations to keep commercial secrets.
That is, you have defined a person,
after that, a person must take obligations to keep commercial secrets.
But usually, what are the options for taking obligations?
They can be taken, for example, within the framework of labor relations, within the framework of a labor agreement,
where one of the parameters is laid down that the preservation of the secrets is protected by the law,
which has become known within the framework of fulfilling the duties of the employee.
This can be a separate agreement or a separate agreement on the preservation of commercial secrets.
By analogy, there is a contract on the preservation of the bank secret.
In legal systems, this blank exists.
It is taken approximately by analogy.
That is, a person takes obligations.
Moreover, I would recommend to conclude a separate agreement, a separate agreement,
simply because in a separate agreement, a separate agreement,
you can describe in great detail, let's say, many points.
In particular, what is understood under the disclosure of a commercial secret.
That is, this is a rather specific thing.
And what is the disclosure of a commercial secret?
There, again, from the point of view of psychological impact on a potential offender,
that is, there is a certain psychological impact when a person concludes a separate agreement.
And then criminal, administrative, labor and so on.
This is more effective from the point of view of psychology.
In a separate agreement, in a separate agreement,
it can be prescribed that a person after dismissal keeps your commercial secrets.
Moreover, if we read according to the law, then even by default there is a certain period,
it is three years.
That is, if a person has taken on himself the obligation to preserve a commercial secret,
but did not prescribe it for what period,
then by default it is considered that within three years after dismissal,
the employee is obliged to keep your commercial secrets.
In practice, let's say, it is quite difficult to control,
and even more difficult to bring a person to responsibility.
Therefore, if you want a person to keep your commercial secrets after dismissal,
it is better to conclude a separate agreement,
because the labor agreement is terminated with the termination of labor relations.
And there, as a rule, it is difficult to apply the norms
regarding what happens after termination of labor relations.
Therefore, it is better to conclude a separate agreement.
In any case, such obligations in one form or another must be taken.
So, the framework of the issue, the solution is that employees must know what the commercial secret is.
That is, a person takes on the obligation to preserve a commercial secret,
he must be informed that the information that we trust you with is a commercial secret.
And he must sign it.
That is, any action must be signed.
He takes on the obligation, he must sign it.
He is pleased with what is a commercial secret, he must sign it.
And in relation to personnel issues, I will probably also draw your attention to the fact that
it is very important to create conditions for employees to perform the commercial secret regime.
What is it?
As a rule, if a commercial secret regime is created, a certain normative base is formed,
instructions are created, where it is clearly regulated what can be done, what cannot be done.
This is applicable to specific people, to specific official duties.
This is the first thing.
And the second thing is that if you prescribe that an employee must store a commercial document,
a document that constitutes a commercial secret, in a safe, then you must at least put this safe in it.
These are obvious things.
Nevertheless, this is also a certain commercial secret regime that must be.
The next thing, everything that concerns the commercial secret regime, is the regulation of relations with counteragents.
Let's call it the regulation of contractual relations.
What is it about?
The regulation of contractual relations.
If you transfer your commercial secrets to other organizations within the framework of some work,
then in the contract on the basis of which you provide this information,
you must prescribe that another organization, where you transfer all this, must keep your commercial secrets,
apply all the measures of protection, you can prescribe that you can control the measures that another organization will apply.
Always assume that the commercial secret regime is individual,
and another organization may have a much worse regime, simply because they see it that way.
This must also be done in a mandatory manner.
And perhaps the last thing that concerns the commercial secret regime,
the minimum that you must do, is the application of a distinctive neck to a material carrier.
The application of a distinctive neck to a material carrier.
Let's call it KT.
Of course, I am decoding it.
The commercial secret.
As I said at the beginning, the commercial secret must be fixed on the material carriers.
These material carriers, it can be a paper carrier, it can be an electronic carrier,
they must have a certain restrictive neck.
A regular restrictive neck is a commercial secret with an indication of whether it has this information,
for legal entities, a full name and location,
for individual entrepreneurs, the surname, name, address, citizen, who are an individual entrepreneur, a place of residence.
This does not always suit companies,
because as soon as a commercial secret appears on some paper,
the employees immediately start thinking about how to sell this document to make money on it.
Therefore, sometimes this is not applicable to some organizations, to some companies,
but in principle, it is legally obligatory.
Here is a list of events, a minimum of events that must be done to create a commercial secret.
Here is another rather subtle point regarding the neck.
At the legislative level, it is not determined whether this neck can be divided into some sub-necks.
Confidential, strictly confidential, commercial secret, strictly commercial secret, special commercial secret.
At the legislative level, this is not the case, so I would not recommend doing this,
simply because it is not in the law.
If there are any problems and a judicial decision is required,
then there may be different approaches to these problems.
Now, the next point.
The commercial secret has certain characteristics.
The characteristics of a commercial secret are its commercial value,
that is, you cannot hide information that is not a commercial value for you.
Although the approach is quite individual, for different companies,
the commercial value may have different information,
that is, different information may have different commercial value.
This is inaccessibility, this is mandatory,
that is, you must restrict access to information in a mandatory manner.
This is security, that is, a certain commercial secret regime must be created.
This is an unlimited security period.
Here is a rather subtle point,
due to the fact that at the legislative level,
the period during which you create a commercial secret regime is not specified.
It can be a year, it can be half a year, it can be one day.
That is, you can create a commercial secret regime for one day.
You can create a commercial secret regime for 100 years,
that is, depending on the need,
unlike, say, some other restrictive rights,
in the form of copyright, there is a clear, definite period.
The commercial secret period is not defined,
it is up to the company's managers.
Now the question arises,
what does it usually mean to have a commercial secret?
I have already mentioned some methods that exist.
There are certain approaches.
What should we attribute to a commercial secret?
As far as I understand,
this problem is usually a technology.
If the company has some technologies,
so-called know-how,
that is, some technological innovations,
that is, technological moments,
then, as a rule, if a commercial secret regime is created,
it is necessarily included there.
This can be,
let's say, some kind of management information.
Management information.
That is, everything that concerns management issues.
I have already mentioned this.
This is all about the company's plans.
First of all, this refers to some kind of strategic plan,
that is, strategic development plans, and everything else.
This is all about financial issues.
Financial.
There are things that you have to introduce
into the commercial secret regime.
In particular, in the accounting law,
if I'm not mistaken,
accounting records should be related to confidential information.
The rest of the things should be considered
depending on the financial documents.
This is analytics.
Especially if you have an analytical unit in your company
that analyzes the situation,
that is, it can conduct some analytical work,
make some analytical reports, documents.
The results of these analytical studies,
as a rule, belong to the commercial secret regime.
Despite the fact that they can be obtained from open sources,
that is, from the same mass media,
they can already have limited access to do some analytical work.
This is all about the information of negotiations.
This includes who,
or rather, what companies are negotiated with,
what topic, what conditions, everything that concerns.
Everything that concerns some kind of contracts,
contracts in business relations.
Pricing policy,
it can be the terms of the contract,
benefits, and everything else.
There may be some other things.
That is, naturally, each company,
depending on what it does,
it compiles its information
related to the commercial secret.
So...
Well, here, probably,
this is what I would like to emphasize again.
Will you create the commercial secret regime?
You will not.
These are your questions.
If you create the commercial secret regime,
then try to close a very small amount of information first.
If you succeed, then gradually expand.
Because closing information is a rather expensive method.
And, as a rule,
not all companies can seriously approach this.
And they cannot seriously allocate serious funds
to protect, to close information.
If it is half a percent of information resources,
you can still close.
If you are trying to close 30% of information resources,
yes, it is possible, but it is very expensive.
So, this is about the commercial secret.
Well, in relation to the responsibility
for disclosure of the commercial secret,
I will not talk about it now,
because I have already talked about it
in the section called personnel security.
So, here, probably,
this is what I would like to focus on.
So, this is about, let's say,
in general, protection of information with limited access.
So, all protection of information with limited access,
in general, I have already said that it is complex.
That is, you cannot protect information resources
just with some piece.
The forms in which the information is located
are determined by means of these forms,
the methods of protection of information are determined.
So, as a rule, everything that concerns a complex solution,
protection,
is organizational measures,
is legal measures,
is technical measures.
Technically, IT security measures are included here,
and protection from channels of information leakage is included.
This is a confidential matter of production,
an official matter of production.
And this is, let's call it, a regime event.
A regime event.
Now, in a nutshell,
I would like to talk about a confidential matter of production,
because I mentioned it,
and now I will just remind you about a confidential matter of production.
So, the question related to a confidential matter of production.
This is also a component of IT security.
As I said,
this is one of the directions,
some events are related to IT security.
So, when does a confidential matter of production occur?
A confidential matter of production.
Naturally, it occurs, first of all,
when some information is protected,
this is clear.
And the second, when confidential information is presented in the form of certain documents,
they can be material, paper, electronic.
The point is that these documents are created somewhere,
they are moved somewhere, stored somewhere,
some resolutions are applied to them,
something is done on them,
that is, when there are certain documents of circulation.
If these two conditions coincide,
then it is necessary to create a confidential matter of production.
It consists of two parts,
in such a classic version.
This is all that concerns the material matter of production.
Material.
Confidential matter of production.
Everything that concerns the electronic.
Electronic.
Confidential matter of production.
It occurs only when there is such a concept as an electronic document.
The concept of an electronic document can only be understood
when the authorship and authenticity of this electronic document is carried out,
that is, when the electronic digital signature is applied.
If you do not apply an electronic digital signature in the company,
then, in general, it is pointless to create an electronic confidential matter of production.
It will no longer be an electronic matter of production,
but an electronic copy of the material matter of production.
As soon as the ECP arises,
you can create an electronic confidential matter of production.
Please note that there is a law on electronic digital signatures,
where certain rules of the game with the ECP are defined.
A law on information, information technologies and information protection has also been adopted recently,
where the electronic digital signature is recognized as an analogue of the confidential signature.
Both the document signed by the electronic digital signature
and the document signed by the confidential signature have the same legal power.
But regarding the electronic digital signature,
we also note that this is not a protection of information.
The goal of the electronic digital signature is to confirm the authorship and authenticity of the document.
That is, protection should be built separately.
This is not a means of protection, but a means of authorship and authenticity.
Everything that concerns the material matter of production,
it consists of two directions.
This is everything that concerns the document of circulation.
And this is everything that concerns the archive, the information storage.
In the simplified version of the archive, it is like an archive.
In the more complex version of the archive, there is only the concept of an active archive.
That is, the documents are submitted there,
and from there they can be obtained.
And it is necessary to check whether there is permission for these documents,
which are submitted to the archive, whether the documents are returned,
whether copies are made of them, whether they are changed.
That is, the so-called life of the archive.
Confidential case of production.
Before creating a confidential case of production,
the game rules are usually determined by some round stones.
In particular, what to determine.
That is, what questions should be answered before creating a confidential case of production.
The first thing to do, let's say, when creating a confidential case of production,
is to determine who appropriates and removes the neck.
This is a rather unimportant question,
because you have determined that, for example, the planned documents of the company are a commercial secret.
Then there should be some official who would determine
what documents the company's planned documents contain,
which documents to include in the confidential case of production.
This is a rather difficult option.
You can go along the way that,
usually in small organizations, some official determines this.
You can go along the way that the document's executor determines
whether the confidential information of this document is confidential,
whether to include it or not in the confidential case of production.
So, let's say, what documents should be included in the confidential case of production.
This is also an important question,
because in the classic case,
the documents containing or making up the commercial secret are included in the confidential case of production.
But in practice, there are a lot of documents that need to be included in this confidential case of production.
These are some strict reporting forms, some numbered documents and everything else.
So, what kind of accounting is determined?
What is it about?
There are two options for accounting documents.
It can be manual accounting or automated accounting.
One of the distinguishing features of the confidential case of production is strict accounting control.
Any document that is created,
it is assigned a number, it must be registered,
the number of copies that are taken from it must be determined,
which officials can get acquainted with it.
If Ivanov gave it to Petrov,
it means that it is necessary to clearly record that at that time Ivanov gave the document to Petrov.
That is, strict accounting control.
It can be handled in a manual version,
that is, in the form of various magazines, registers, notes, and so on.
It can be handled in an electronic version.
Now there are quite a lot of products that are handled in an electronic version of the confidential case of production.
This must be determined.
It is determined, let's say, how to create.
How to create?
It is about two options,
separately or on the basis of the open one.
It is clear that in any company there is an open case of production.
There is a case of production gospel,
where documents are written, how to design, how to create, how to send.
The confidential case of production can be created on the basis of the open case of production,
that is, some information sections are allocated, which are closed,
safes are inserted, and so on.
This is the first option, it is perhaps the simplest and most common.
The second option is to create a confidential case of production separately,
that is, in no way connected with the open case of production.
This option is also possible, there are pluses and minuses,
you need to proceed with a specific situation.
What is determined?
How are documents created?
How and where are they created?
Some premises are determined,
where you can create a confidential case of production.
The officials who can create documents are determined.
The means of protection are established,
technical means, all sorts of, say, alarms, and so on.
It is determined how to store, how to create,
how to create, how to store confidential documents.
Well, the storage is generally clear,
the main goal here is to make it so that the unauthorized persons
exclude access to these documents.
Basically, these are either safes or systems,
say, some kind of metal cabinets.
Everything depends on the need, value, and safety of these documents.
In terms of storage, the moment of destruction of documents is determined.
There are different approaches to destruction.
The classic option is destruction in shredders,
special machines for shredding documents.
They come in different classes.
There are shredders that cut a sheet of paper only along,
and there are shredders that cut a sheet of paper not only along, but also across.
There are shredders that are guaranteed not to be restored.
That is, they cut such a small number of particles,
A4, in my opinion, for 15,000 parts.
Basically, they cut a standard sheet of A4 into powder.
I would recommend using shredders that are guaranteed not to be restored,
that is, those that cut not only along, but also across.
If necessary, you can buy large shredders.
There are shredders that can destroy a whole pack of papers at once.
They are expensive, but the principle is the same.
The same knives, just bigger, and the same motors, only more powerful.
They are expensive, but if necessary, there are also such shredders.
I would recommend setting up a rule in the company,
which says that any company documents should be destroyed using shredders.
Because as soon as you start to determine that these documents can be put in a garbage basket,
these documents can be put in shredders,
usually, again, taking into account the human factor,
someone will confuse something, someone will throw something wrong.
Therefore, it may make sense to determine that all documents are destroyed using shredders.
And garbage baskets are intended for apple peels, banana peels, empty cans of beer, etc.
Here is what I would like to draw your attention to in relation to the destruction of documents.
This is a collegiality of destruction.
It may make sense to make such a procedure in the organization,
that some confidential documents are destroyed collegially.
That is, a commission is created,
this can be the executor of the document and the security service employee,
who is signed that this sheet of paper was not turned into a tube and not taken out,
but it was destroyed.
This may be unacceptable in many companies,
because it is a bureaucratic procedure, it distracts the forces of the means.
But in some situations and according to some confidential documents, this is probably possible.
This is for destruction.
You can destroy documents by burning,
although it is probably convenient when there are a lot of documents.
If there are not many documents, it makes sense to use shredders.
In relation to the destruction of documents, what else is determined?
As a rule, the order of the transfer of confidential documents is determined.
Here, what I will draw your attention to,
in any case, there will be a need to transfer some confidential documents,
move some documents,
some documents will be taken by the management to work at home.
Unfortunately, this is an objective reality.
Ideally, the document should not go beyond the controlled room.
But life is multifaceted, and this is why such situations arise.
You can foresee such situations,
and it makes sense to determine some order of transferring documents from the controlled territory.
In the vast majority of cases, a certain permission is required.
How is it determined?
A permission is required.
The official who gives this permission is required.
When moving between objects,
usually several people move the confidential document in their car.
That is, a driver goes, a person with a document goes.
It is forbidden for them to deviate from the route,
it is forbidden to take passengers,
it is forbidden to enter some five-star hotels.
But there should be an order of transfer plus an order of movement.
The order of movement is beyond the control zone.
Usually, the order of transferring confidential documents is determined.
The order of transferring confidential documents is about the provision,
for example, within the framework of some verification activities.
We are talking about the creation of certain algorithms in action.
For example, a tax office, a police, a fire brigade, or anyone else comes.
They can require certain documents within the framework of verification activities.
What is the order of providing these documents within the framework of verification activities?
This order must be regulated, determined.
It should not go beyond the framework of the current legislation.
But in order to regulate it, it is necessary to introduce a certain order,
that is, there must be some kind of instruction.
Here you can include the order of providing information,
for example, in the Internet resource,
the order of providing confidential information,
for example, at some negotiations, at some exhibition events.
That is, it is the confidential documents.
And, probably, a certain control is determined.
Control over the confidential production.
Control can be
Well, I have already said that various control measures can go both planned and unplanned.
Control over the copying and multiplying technique,
control over multiplication, printing, sending documents.
Unfortunately, the modern office is flooded with various copying and multiplying techniques.
Any confidential document does not imply unauthorized multiplication.
Therefore, it is necessary to clearly track the number of copies made,
who met which copy and where they are.
Therefore, there must be a certain control.
Technical means are also included here.
Control over the copying of information from the computer,
for example, on the movement of documents on the network,
on the sending of confidential documents,
for example, by email, and so on.
I would probably include control here,
and the question of who will be subject to the confidential production.
That is, the management of the company must have a certain designated official,
to whom the confidential production will be closed.
That is, who will solve the issues of the confidential production.
Because, as a rule, there are a lot of issues and problems in the confidential production,
which require solutions, including at the level of the management.
This is the confidential production.
When all these issues are determined,
the confidential production is created,
the necessary equipment is purchased,
the necessary regulatory documents are created,
personnel training is carried out,
and then this system, when properly operated, should work.
Here, look at the automated systems of the confidential production on the market.
They are presented, they are configured for a specific organization,
they can be sold as scramble systems.
Therefore, the issues that are solved,
they must be solved in accordance with the answers to the issues that you have set for yourself.
Economic security
The next topic that we will discuss is economic security.
I will remind you that economic security,
economic security,
in fact, is the security of business processes that take place in the company.
It is built in several directions.
This is business intelligence.
Business intelligence.
This is information and analytical work.
This is analysis and risk management.
Economic risks.
This is protection against fraud.
Protection against fraud.
This can be protection against hostile absorption.
Hostile absorption.
This can be protection against some illegal actions,
depending on the company's activities.
If this is the financial sphere,
then protection against illegal actions,
such as non-return of loans,
with plastic cards,
with fraud in plastic cards, etc.
This is more protection against fraud.
Economic security.
This topic is very extensive.
I can talk for hours about economic security.
I will probably stop at one direction,
and I will talk about business intelligence.
Business intelligence.
There are different interpretations.
There is corporate intelligence,
there is competitive intelligence,
there is business intelligence.
In fact, business intelligence is built in two directions.
This is information work.
This is analytical work.
This is a kind of information collection,
and this is done exclusively by legal means.
Business intelligence does not engage in illegal methods.
Information collection is also industrial espionage.
There may be non-ethical methods,
but legal ones.
Analytical work is done from the point of view of business intelligence.
There are two directions in business intelligence.
The first direction is strategic.
The second direction is operational.
The third direction is strategic.
What is a strategic direction?
It is a solution of strategic tasks
from the perspective of the security of the organization.
What do I mean by strategic tasks?
This is the analysis of the legislation
from the point of view of a particular company,
that is, in the field of activity of a particular company.
This is an analysis of the competitive environment,
that is, what companies exist in this market,
how they develop, what threats they pose.
This is an analysis of the market as a whole,
the analysis of the possibility of the emergence of some products or substitutes,
the analysis of some resources of this market,
the analysis of the needs of this market.
These are quite similar things
from the point of view of strategic planning.
Although business intelligence
is about threats and risks.
Strategic planning can come from the point of view of profit,
business intelligence comes from the point of view of threats.
The operational direction is a private local direction.
Usually, it is about checking a particular company,
a particular organization.
You want to conclude an agreement with a particular organization,
you want to see what kind of organization it is,
what it is like,
whether it will pay for its obligations,
who is behind this company,
and how decent this company is.
This is a so-called payment capability check,
or partner reliability.
This is a local operational direction.
Information is collected for negotiations.
That is, it is planned to carry out some negotiations
with a person or an organization.
Information is collected for negotiations.
Or, in the vast majority of cases,
this is a collection of information before concluding a deal.
If you work as a swordsman's watchman,
in a twelve-chair,
in the morning money, in the evening chair,
this is very relevant.
If you work with the source,
that is, first you send money somewhere,
then you wait for some product,
or vice versa, you send a product,
then you wait for money,
then it makes sense to check
whether the organization will pay for the debts that do not exist.
There are stages of business intelligence.
I will dwell on them a little.
The first stage is the task setting.
The more correct and clear you set the task,
the easier and cheaper it will be
to go into business intelligence.
Because the task must always be set clearly
based on the questions
you want to get an answer to.
This is about the same as the lie detector test,
which I talked about in the security video.
That is, you can't just test a person on a lie detector.
As a rule, they test the answer to some questions.
The same cannot be done
when you ask to collect all the information
from some company,
but it will be completely useless for use.
That is, you need to set the task in the following way.
Collect the information I need
to make a decision.
The decision may be to sign a contract with this company
or not.
The information is collected and analytical work is carried out
from the point of view of the organization's payability.
You need to pay attention to this
because you need to set the question very clearly and correctly.
The second stage is the information collection.
There are different methods of collecting information.
I will talk about them in more detail.
That is, they collect information
in various methods.
The third stage is the evaluation of information.
This is about translating it into information.
Information is some kind of information.
To make a decision, it is pointless to collect information.
You need to collect it,
evaluate it and transfer the information to the data.
The data is different from the information
because the data is already evaluated.
The evaluation can take place in different directions.
From the point of view of reliability,
completeness, relevance,
secrecy, reliability of the source and so on.
The fourth stage is the analysis.
After the information is translated into the data,
analytical work is carried out based on this data.
Again, this is done to answer the questions
that are initially put in the task.
The fifth stage is the preparation of conclusions.
The preparation of conclusions is usually done
in the form of a certain document.
This is an information-analytical note,
a reference.
It is made up of two parts.
This is the information part.
The information that has been collected
is stated here.
The information is then collected
and the information that has been collected is stated.
This is either information or certain information.
The part that is dedicated to the answers to those questions.
The conclusions should be the answer
to the questions that were asked.
Here you need to start from the fact
that business intelligence
is a prediction of the future.
An attempt to find out what will happen.
Will the organization pay its debts?
Will it fulfill its obligations?
Or not?
Therefore, the conclusions are usually not categorical.
Certain terminologies are carried out.
The most likely is the possibility.
If you can calculate the percentage,
the percentage is calculated.
It is difficult to calculate the percentage.
This is possible when you can apply
mathematical calculations or statistics.
There is a poll at the elections.
You can say that a certain percentage
will vote for Ivanov and Ivan Ivanovich.
You can make a certain percentage
based on statistics in an information-analytical note.
If this cannot be done,
then you can use terminologies.
This is a gradation of the five-point system.
Very likely, likely, unlikely,
unlikely.
Again, it depends on how you look at it.
You can look at a bottle half empty
or a bottle half full.
You can say that Ivanov and Ivan Ivanovich
will win the elections with a 50% chance.
Petrov and Petrovich will win with a 50% chance.
Therefore, you should be careful
with conclusions.
It is desirable to do so,
so that later it is not so shameful
for the conclusions you have presented.
I will focus on two things.
This is information collection and information analysis.
What are the methods of information collection?
There are so-called office methods.
They are easy to access.
What do I include here?
These are various media
that can be easily obtained
by using the information collection
and information analysis.
I will not go into details.
I will just show you
the methods of information collection.
Here is the Internet.
There is a large number of Internet resources
that can be used for business intelligence.
You can include various books, CD-ROMs,
databases, etc.
These are the methods that can be used
for obtaining information without leaving the office.
There is a concept of office hard-to-access methods.
Office hard-to-access methods.
This is about collecting this information
without leaving the office.
There are certain difficulties
in obtaining this information.
For example, there are some information arrays
that are difficult to read.
They are in Chinese.
They can be translated,
but it requires some effort.
For example, the translator's effort is required.
There can be some closed reports,
some unpublished collections or reference books, etc.
There are methods that require
leaving the office.
They are called field methods.
What I mean by field methods
is various surveys, interviews,
exhibitions, observations, presentations.
You can come to a research firm,
observe the company's activities
for a certain period of time.
You can understand whether this firm is alive or not.
You can understand whether someone leaves the firm
or not, whether some cars enter the firm
or not.
You can understand the number of cars
that leave the firm, etc.
There are so-called operational methods.
What do they imply?
They imply the implementation of certain
operational events.
These are events related to certain games.
This is an example of a game
or a visit to a restaurant
and to infuse a person with a drink.
These are also operational methods.
A meeting of a light chess player
with the company's secretary
is also an operational method.
There are so-called expert methods.
Expert methods imply the attraction of experts.
There is a number of organizations
that provide information resources.
There are many information companies
that can collect information
about a particular organization,
conduct analysis of the region,
industry, etc.
I would like to draw your attention
to the following point.
We have official methods
of obtaining information
from state bodies.
Unlike personal data,
there are official channels
of obtaining information
from state bodies by legal entities.
This can be obtained
from the Tax Service,
from the Spark information database,
a professional system
for analyzing markets and companies.
There is an opportunity
to obtain official information
from the Redina State Register
on real estate.
There is an opportunity
to obtain official information
from the Trade and Industry Chamber database.
There are many Internet resources
for obtaining information
from the official website
and from the state websites
and specialized websites
that provide information
about a particular organization
or specific areas of activity.
There are information resources
in the form of professional databases.
For example,
there is a company called LexisNexis
and there is a company called
Dunton Brandstreet.
These are international databases
that provide information
and can be used to obtain information.
There is a professional database
on the Russian market.
There is a company called SINZ,
Lex, Lines, RIP, Integrum,
Intralex, Astarte, and many more.
There is a database
that is not official
and is presented on the Russian market.
It can be used to obtain information
about companies that are interested.
It includes manufacturers of goods and services,
statistical reporting,
labyrinth, customs, press,
registration room,
and many more.
At least, it can be used
as a channel to obtain information.
Now I will draw an analytical work
in a few words.
In general,
the work of an analytical
is more complex
than the work of an information specialist.
It is more difficult
to find a good analyst
than a good information specialist.
Unfortunately,
there are not many specialists
in the field of business intelligence
and it is much more difficult to find one.
An analytical work is carried out
in two directions.
The first one is the work of an analyst
as a person.
The second one is the work
of automated analytical systems.
I am quite calm
about automated analytical systems
because they cannot replace
the analytical mind of a person.
They can work well
when they are used as a help
for the work of an analyst.
The basis should be done
for the work of an analyst,
but the automated systems
can handle the processing
of large amounts of information.
They work very well
when it is necessary
to process and track the connections
between a huge number of information resources.
They work very well
according to the scenarios.
If the system is used in a different region
or in a different country,
it will tell you that it is working
according to the scenario.
Such things are well tracked.
The disadvantage of automated systems
is that they do not take into account
many things that an analyst can take into account
such as inner feelings, experience,
voice, intuition, etc.
It is a machine, it works
according to a certain algorithm.
Life is more complicated.
It should happen
according to the automated system.
Ivan Ivanovich went to the sauna
with Petrov and Petrovich
and everything began to go a little differently.
The disadvantage of automated systems
is that they have a tough result.
They can estimate some events
because the automated system
is a computer, it is a unit of zeros.
As a result, we can say
that there will be a scenario A,
or scenario B, or scenario C.
We already put the development scenario
An analyst can say
that there will be not the same scenarios,
but scenarios C or E.
The machine will not be able to do this.
It is a system that works according to the program.
It will say that there will be either the first,
second or third scenario.
This is the end of our seminar.
I hope that the information
that you have learned in this video
will help you to build an effective
corporate security system
and protect yourself from the threats
that exist in your business.
Thank you.